---
title: "MICB425 portfolio"
author: "Niknaz Malekafzali (24003148)"
date: "version `r format(Sys.time(), '%B %d, %Y')`"
output: html_document
---
#R Evidence Worksheet #1
Q1) What were the main questions being asked? 
A1) The authors were mostly interested to know about growth and turnover rates of prokaryotic cells in different habitats, as well as carbon resources and their respective amounts in different habitats. In addition, the authors were also interested in N and P resources in the environment. 
The main questions being asked were: What is the total number of prokaryotes on Earth? Where are the main prokaryotic habitats and what is the estimated abundance of prokaryotes  in different reservoirs (open ocean, soil, and in oceanic and terrestrial subsurfaces)? How much carbon is being produced by these prokaryotes? What is the total nutrient content present in prokaryotes (N and P)? How do prokaryotes affect the carbon cycle?

Q2)What were the primary methodological approaches used? 
A2)Soil: They used direct counts from coniferous forest soil (ultisol) and previous studies to calculate the cellular density in the soil. To calculate the total number of prokaryotic cells in soil they combined the value for the amount of soil on earth, from literature, with the values found for cellular density.

Aquatics Environments (Oceanic reservoirs, polar region, and freshwater/saline lakes): In order to determine the number of prokaryotic cells, they multiplied the average, estimated cellular density in aquatic environments with the estimated amount of marine and fresh water quantities (Volume) on Earth from the literature. For polar regions, they relied on the mean number of prokaryotes that was published by Delille & Rosiers (literature) and the mean area extent of seasonal ice. 

Terrestrial subsurface:The estimated value for the quantity (volume) of ground water on Earth from the literature was multiplied by the estimated prokaryotic numbers that they had found from ground water based on the values of several sites. In addition, they also calculated the number of prokaryotes in terrestrial subsurface by using the average porosity of the terrestrial subsurface soil, the total pore space occupied by prokaryotes in these pores, and the volume of the upper 4km of the terrestrial subsurface (with the first two being assumptions). 

Carbon Content and production: Estimated the amount of carbon in prokaryotes based on the number of prokaryotic cells in soil, aquatic system, and the subsurface. In soil and subsurface, it has been assumed that one-half of the dry weight is the cellular carbon. In addition, they assumed that the amount of carbon produced by prokaryotes during each turnover is about four times their carbon content, therefore, using this information and the turn over rates, they calculated the production of prokaryotic carbon. For aquatic systems, they assumed that the average cellular carbon to be 5 fg of C/cell and multiplied this by the number of prokaryotic cells in the aquatic system to obtain the total amount of prokaryotic cellular carbon. 

Q3)Summarize the main results or findings.
A3)-The total number of prokaryotes and the amount of cellular carbon on associated with prokaryotes were estimated to be 4-6x10^30 cells and 350-550 Pg of C, respectively. 
-The total amount of prokaryotic carbon is 60-100% of the estimated total carbon in plants. 
-Prokaryotes contain large amounts of N (85-130 Pg) and P (9-14 Pg): ~10-fold more than these found in plants. Therefore, prokaryotes represent the largest pool of nutrients in living organisms. 
-Prokaryotes are mostly populated in open ocean, soil, and in oceanic and terrestrial subsurfaces with the number of cells being 1.2x10^29, 2.6x10^29, 3.5x10^30, and 0.25-2.5x10^30, respectively. 

- Average prokaryotic turnover time:
Subsurface: about 1-2x10^3 year-lower than expected
200m upper ocean: 6-25 days
Ocean below 200m: 0.8 years
soil: 2.5 years

-They estimated the cellular production rate of prokaryotes on Earth to be 1.7x10^30 cells/yr and they found that cellular production is the highest in open ocean. Lastly, the high mutation rates, large population size and rapid growth of prokaryotes results in genetic diversity. 

Q4)Do new questions arise from the results? 
A4)-Why is the residence time higher than expected for subsurface?
-How do we define species and their phylogenetic relationships?
-Were the calculations done properly and are the results valid since a lot of assumptions were made in the process of calculation? 
-Given the high abundance of prokaryotes in certain environments, what is their role in the total metabolic potential of the ecosystem?  
Why was the cellular rate of production highest in open ocean? 
Why was the estimated average prokaryotic turnover time lower than expected? 

Q5) Were  there  any  specific  challenges  or  advantages  in  understanding  the  paper  (e.g.  did  the  authors  provide  sufficient  background  information  to  understand  experimental  logic,  were  methods  explained  adequately,  were  any  specific  assumptions  made,  were  conclusions  justified  based on the evidence, were the figures or tables useful and easy to understand)?  
A5)-Terminology and units should have explained more. ex: simultaneous mutations
-No supplemental figures and texts were provided to further explain their results and methods. Given they had provided further explanation, understanding and interpretations of their calculations and results would have been easier. 
-The results were explained in details, however, the credibility of their results is questionable since a lot of the numbers that were used in calculation of their results were either from previous studies (e.x, cell density) for which their method of collection of these data was not explained. In addition, they made a lot of assumptions (e.x, the percentage of the total pore space occupied by prokaryotes) and extrapolations. Therefore, the obtained results and their calculations is questionable and should be improved. 

#R Problem Set #1
Q1)What are the primary prokaryotic habitats on Earth and how do they vary with respect to their capacity to support life? Provide a breakdown of total cell abundance for each primary habitat from the tables provided in the text.
A1)The primary prokaryotic habitats on Earth are aquatic (seawater)
soil, and marine sediment/soil subsurface. The total number of prokaryotes in soil is 255.6x10^27 cells, 1.181x10^29 cells in aquatic habitats (mostly found in the upper 200m of the open ocean), and 3.8x10^30 cells in subsurface sediments. 

Q2)What is the estimated prokaryotic cell abundance in the upper 200 m of the ocean and what fraction of this biomass is represented by marine cyanobacterium including Prochlorococcus? What is the significance of this ratio with respect to carbon cycling in the ocean and the atmospheric composition of the Earth?
A2)The estimated prokaryotic cell abundance in the upper 200 m of the ocean is 3.6x10^28 cells at cellular density of 5x10^5 cells/mL. In this habitat, the average cellular density of the autotrophic marine cyanobacterium (including Prochlorococcus) is 4x10^4 cells/mL, which would make 8% of the biomass in the upper 200m of the ocean that supports carbon availability for the rest of the 92% heterotrophs present.  

Calculation: (4x10^4 cells/ml)/(5x10^5 cells/ml)x100=8%

Q3)What is the difference between an autotroph, heterotroph, and a lithotroph based on
information provided in the text?
A3)According to the article, autotrophs are organisms that use the substances around them to make complex organic compounds (they fix inorganic carbon e.x co2-> biomass). Therefore, these organisms produce their own food. 

Heterotrophs: Assimilate organic matter to produce energy (produce carbon from organic sources)
 
Lithotrophs: assimilate and metabolize inorganic matter and release energy (obtain electrons from inorganic sources) 

Q4)Based on information provided in the text and your knowledge of geography what is the deepest habitat capable of supporting prokaryotic life? What is the primary limiting factor at this depth?
A4)The deepest habitat capable of supporting prokaryotic life is terrestrial subsurface sediments at the depth of 4000m (4km), with the primary limiting factor being the temperature with the average of 125C, which is close to the upper temperature limit for prokaryotic life (every one km is about 22C difference). The deepest point on earth where life can exists is the Mariana Trench, which is about 10.9km deep. You can go an extra 4-5 km where prokaryotic cells reside. The limiting factor for this depth is temperature. 

Q5)Based on information provided in the text your knowledge of geography what is the highest habitat capable of supporting prokaryotic life? What is the primary limiting factor at this height?
A5)The highest point on Earth where life exists is the Mount Everest, which is about 8.8 km above sea level. However, the highest habitat capable of supporting prokaryotic life is the atmosphere where prokaryotes are present as high as 57-77 km (however a more realistic boundary would be around 20km above mount Everest).The limiting factors include presence of different percentage of gasses as an example lower oxygen percentage in higher altitudes as well as different gas pressures. The lack of moisture and nutrients as well as high ionizing radiation. In addition, temperature could be another limiting factor in this habitat. 
Therefore, the extent at which life exists on Earth is around 24km.

Q6)Based on estimates of prokaryotic habitat limitation, what is the vertical distance of the Earth’s biosphere measured in km?
A6)The extent at which life exists on Earth is around 24km. The biosphere is the part of the Earth where life exists, with a  vertical distance of 24 km. This is from Mount Everest (8.8km above sea level) to the bottom of Mariana’s Trench (10.9 km deep), with an addition 4km added. 

Q7)How was annual cellular production of prokaryotes described in Table 7 column four determined? (Provide an example of the calculation)
A7) Annual cellular production= (Population size)/(turnover time per year)(multiplied by the number of days in a year)= cells/year

Sample calculation: 
(3.6x10^28 cells*365/ 16 turnovers)= 8.2x10^29 cells/ year

Q8)What is the relationship between carbon content, carbon assimilation efficiency and turnover rates in the upper 200m of the ocean? Why does this vary with depth in the ocean and between terrestrial and marine habitats?
A8)-Carbon content in a prokaryotic cells= ~20 fg (assuming 5-20 fg of C/prokaryotic cell)= (20)(10^-30) Pg/cell
-Carbon assimilation efficiency: 0.2 (20%) converting inorganic carbon into biomass
-Number of cells= 3.6x 10^28 cells
-(3.6x10^28cells)(20x10^-30 Pg/cell)=0.72 Pg C in marine heterotrophs
(0.72 Pg C)(4)= 2.88 Pg/year
51 Pg c/year -> 85% consumed = 43 Pg C consumed per year
(43 Pg C/year)/(2.88 Pg/year)=14.9 
1 turn over every 24.5 days

A large population will have a higher carbon content due as well as a longer turnover as the result. Therefore, carbon content is dependent on turnover rate and population size assuming carbon assimilation efficiency remains constant.
These values vary due to the amount of exposure to sunlight and the lytic bacteriophages that are largely present in the upper 200m of the ocean. 

Q9)How were the frequency numbers for four simultaneous mutations in shared genes determined for marine heterotrophs and marine autotrophs given an average mutation rate of 4 x 10-7 per DNA replication? (Provide an example of the calculation with units. Hint: cell and generation cancel out)
A9)*Have to raise to the power of 4 since it’s four mutation in a single gene at the same time: (4x10^-7)^4=256x10^-28 mutation/generation

Now we need to know how many times do cells generate themselves per year aka turnover time: 365/16=22.8 turnovers/year multiplied by (3.6x10^28 cells)= 8.2x10^29 cells/year

[(256x10^-28 mutation)/(per generation)]x (8.2x10^29 cells/year)= 20992= 2.1x10^4 mutation/year

(20992 mutation/year)x(1year/12months)x(1 month/28 days)x(1day/24hr)=2.603 mutation/hr= 0.38=0.4 hr/ mutation

autotroph: (256x10^-28 mutation)x[(7.1x10^29)/year]x(1/12x28x24)=0.44~0.5 hr/mutation

Q10)Given the large population size and high mutation rate of prokaryotic cells, what are the implications with respect to genetic diversity and adaptive potential? Are point mutations the only way in which microbial genomes diversify and adapt?
A10)One of the factors that result in genetic diversity and formation of novel species is mutations. In addition to mutations, Horizontal Gene Transfer (HGT): transformation, transduction, and conjugation are responsible for the genetic diversity seen in prokaryotes. Prokaryotic cells who have favarouble mutations, will adopt better to their sorounding environment and survive better. 

Q11) What relationships can be inferred between prokaryotic abundance, diversity, and metabolic potential based on the information provided in the text?
A11) Large prokaryotic cells population allows for rare events to occur more frequently in nature. For example, prokaryotes have enormous potential to acquire genetic diversity by accumulating mutations, however, growth rates must also be taken into account when measuring potential mutational changes in a population. Large, slow growing populations may produce fewer cells and fewer mutations compared to small, fast growing populations. Therefore, if we have high abundance, high growth rate and therefore rapid replication, then we have high mutation rates, which increases the diversity of the population. Increase in the diversity of population increases metabolic potential in response to selective pressure and stress. 
   
